<!--This file was generated, do not modify it.-->
# Wideband direct conversion IF stage for the RFSoC
Recently a number of microwave (17 - 45 GHz) IQ downconverters targeted to the 5G wireless network have appeared on the market, e.g. [HMC904](https://www.analog.com/en/products/hmc904.html), [HMC977](https://www.analog.com/en/products/hmc977.html), [ADMV1012](https://www.analog.com/en/products/admv1012.html), and [ADMV1014](https://www.analog.com/en/products/admv1014.html). An evaluation board is available for all these chips, so only interface to the RFSoC (e.g. the [ZCU111](https://www.xilinx.com/products/boards-and-kits/zcu111.html) evaluation board) ADC's is needed to be designed and built in-house.

Building a wideband receiver for radio astronomy would be (at least in theory!) quite easy with these chips. Here is a concept for a 22 GHz receiver (8 GHz bandwidth, one polarization):

\figalt{IQ-IF-22}{./IQ-IF-22.svg}

and one for 37/43 GHz (also 8 GHz bandwidth, one polarization):

\figalt{IQ-IF-43}{./IQ-IF-43.svg}

Of course these designs can be used also at IF for higher frequency receivers (86 GHz and up).

For simplicity the RFSoC 4GS/s ADC's (total of eight in a chip) are used in an interleaved mode to increase the total speed to 8 GS/s and 4 GHz bandwidth per channel. This is possible because analog bandwidth of these converters is 4 GHz. Because both the I and Q channels are digitized, the total bandwidth is 8 GHz.

It should be noted that in the examples above, the chips are used slightly beyond spacifications, not in a way that the performance (IF response from DC and up to 4 GHz) is known to be bad outside specs but that the values are not shown in the datasheets. These values can easily be measured during the design process. Slight droops in the response can of course be calibrated out in the firmware (ADC's have 12 bit dynamic range)).

# Digitizing IQ streams

To clarify IQ mixing and conversion process, here is a simple simulation written in [Julia language](https://julialang.org).

Let's first load some libraries:

```julia:ex1
using DSP, PyPlot
```

Set up sampling rate at the input port, this is large enough to express the 16 GHz IF band. In reality, this signal is in the analog domain.

```julia:ex2
const GHz = 1e9
fs = 32GHz;
```

Then a test signal is generated by filtering some white noise and adding two sinusoids (6 GHz and 9 GHz).

```julia:ex3
h = remez(35, fs.*[0, 0.2, 0.25, 0.5], [0.5, 1], Hz = fs);
rf_sig = randn(1000000);
t = range(0, step = 1/fs, length = length(rf_sig))
rf_sig = rf_sig + 0.2*sin.(2*pi*6GHz*t) + 0.1*sin.(2*pi*9GHz*t);
rf_sig = filt(h, rf_sig);
```

A convenience function for plotting spectrum:

```julia:ex4
function plotspec(sig, fs, limits)
    n = div(length(sig), 1024)
    noverlap = div(n, 2)
    pgram = welch_pgram(sig, n, noverlap)
    f = freq(pgram)
    p = power(pgram)
    i = sortperm(f)
    plt = plot(fs*f[i]/GHz, pow2db.(p[i]))
    ylim(limits...)
    xlabel("Frequency [GHz]")
    ylabel("Power [dB]")
    return plt
end
```

The resulting test signal looks like this:

```julia:ex5
figure() # hide

plotspec(rf_sig, fs, (-10, 10))
title("Input signal spectrum");

savefig(joinpath(@OUTPUT, "spectrum.svg")) # hide
```

\figalt{spectrum}{spectrum.svg}

The input signal is mixed (multiplied) with the complex local oscillator (LO) signal at 8 GHz producing a complex baseband signal:

```julia:ex6
lo_sig = 8GHz*t;
baseband_sig = rf_sig.*exp.(im*2*pi*lo_sig);
```

Before AD conversion, the baseband signal must be lowpass filtered to 0 - 4 GHz (Nyquist):

```julia:ex7
responsetype = Lowpass(3.8GHz, fs=fs)
designmethod = Butterworth(20)
i = filt(digitalfilter(responsetype, designmethod), imag(baseband_sig))
q = filt(digitalfilter(responsetype, designmethod), real(baseband_sig));
```

In this simulation, AD conversion is expressed as decimation, i.e. only every fourth sample is preserved. Now the sample rate of each of the streams is (32/4 GS/s =) 8 GS/s, i.e. the sample rate of two interleaved ADC's in the RFSoC.

```julia:ex8
i = i[1:4:end]
q = q[1:4:end];
```

Here are spectra of the digitized I and Q streams. The amplitude spectra seem to be identical and summed version of the upper and lower basebands (phase differs).

```julia:ex9
figure() # hide
subplot(121)
plotspec(i, fs/4, (-15, 5))
title("Filtered I channel")
subplot(122)
plotspec(q, fs/4, (-15, 5))
title("Filtered Q channel")
tight_layout(pad=2.0)
savefig(joinpath(@OUTPUT, "iqspectrum.svg")) # hide
```

\figalt{iqspectrum}{iqspectrum.svg}

Let's combine the streams to a complex signal:

```julia:ex10
c = i + q.*im
```

Spectrum of the complex signal is a good representation of the original signal around LO at 8 GHz:

```julia:ex11
subplot(111)
plotspec(c, fs/4, (-20, 0))
title("Complex baseband signal spectrum");
savefig(joinpath(@OUTPUT, "cspectrum.svg")) # hide
```

\figalt{cspectrum}{cspectrum.svg}

